Um, uh, to the Social
Supers and committee, select Committee.
So we have, uh, you for 60 minutes this morning.
Um, uh, please, uh, feel free to introduce yourselves
and, uh, make some introductory, um, comments.
And then, uh, after
that we'll move to questions from members.
I'll try and keep it short. Um, uh, uh, good morning, Mr.
Chair, members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to present on social
investment agencies work over the past year.
My name is Alistair Mason.
I'm acting Secretary for Social Investment
and Chief Executive of the Social Investment Agency.
Joining me today is Afra Green,
deputy Chief Executive Assistant
Performance and Investment Advice.
Joe Fowler, deputy Chief Executive
Investment and Commissioning.
And behind me have some other members of staff,
including our CFA, despite significant
and growing investment in social services outcomes
for our most vulnerable remain poor.
Put simply, people with complex needs are not well served
by fragmented and siloed
and siloed system in which services are di divided up
between different agencies, time and again.
They slip through the cracks.
They need integrated solutions delivered early
to prevent a cycle of crisis
intervention throughout their lives.
The role of the SIA is to identify opportunities
to break the cycle to ensure people
with complex needs received the kind of support they need
before the crisis point.
To do that, we're using data to see who's at risk of.
We're trusting communities
and providers to design solutions,
and we're giving them the resources and freedom to deliver.
We're collecting and monitoring evidence
of what's working and what isn't.
In our first year, we have focused on establishing the
foundations for complex multifaceted system change
with a particular emphasis on data, evidence
and targeted investment.
A core part of this work has been opening up
access to data and evidence.
We've developed a regional data explorer tool
that would enable local providers
and commissioners to understand population trends
and outcomes in their communities.
Who needs support, what works, and where the gaps exist.
This shifts us towards evidence
informed practice at a local level.
Social investment requires
clarity about who we're supporting.
So we u we are using data to identify cohorts
at greatest risk of poor outcomes.
We want to understand not just their immediate needs,
but the interconnected challenges they're facing.
This approach allows us to target interventions
where they'll have the greatest impact
and track outcomes over time.
As a central agency
and a system lead, our role to role is
to lead the implementation
of the social investment approach, build the infrastructure
and tools required, and demonstrate how aspects
of social investment can work from practice.
Our engagement with other agencies across the social system
is already bearing fruit, and we are beginning
to see agencies applying the social investment lens
to the commissioning programs.
We'll continue to work to shift the system setting standards
and using data and evidence so the system invests earlier
and more effectively to change lives.
Budget 25 a allocated $190 million
to the social investment fund over four years.
Ministers subsequently decided priority cohorts
in August 25.
Round one. Procurement process was openly advertised.
That process and foundations we allowed laid down over the
24 25 financial year and now paying off.
Most recently, the Minister
for Social Investment announced seven organizations working
with children and families of complex needs that have,
that have been selected to receive
funding through Pathway One.
New initiatives together, they stand
to receive $50 million over four years, delivering programs
to supporting 1600 children and their families per year.
Pathway two will consolidate contracts across multiple
government departments, reducing the sort of fragmentation
that sees providers managing dozens
of separate funding streams,
spending more time writing reports for Wellington,
and less time delivering vital services.
We expect to announce the results
of Pathway two process early in the new year.
Everywhere else work is well underway, scoping
and designing pathways three
and four, which involve local commissioning
and co-investment with iwi, philanthropists,
and community trusts.
This year we are shifting from design to delivery,
implementing outcome-based contracting,
open those partnership pathways, working directly
with agencies to demonstrate
what social investment looks like in practice.
It's worth emphasizing that while our own efforts amount
to only a tiny sum
of the overall SP social services spending,
our work is about leading and demonstrating an approach
to social spending that comes
to redefine the way all social
services are designed and delivered.
With that in mind, we'll continue
to bolster our system lead role with guidance
and standards to embed social investment
principles across the sector.
Ultimately want, we want to put decisions
and the information needed to make them as close as possible
to the people they affect, and
that will be guiding our process in the year to come.
Thank you Mr. Chair. We welcome committee these questions.
Uh, thank you very much. Uh,
first question is from Lawrence.
Uh, thank you chair. Um, thank you for coming
and thank you for the work that you do.
Uh, my first question is just picking up on something you
said where you said Minister decided on priority cohort,
how then, because the idea
of the agency is a long-term focus
and you said outcome focused.
Mm-hmm. What happens then when the minister change their
mind and then they decide to prioritize something else?
How then would you measure the outcome?
Our role is to present the best
advice we can to ministers.
So they decide the particular cohorts.
Um, we implement, uh, the decisions that they make,
but our advice is very transparent about
how we came across those cohorts,
how we selected those cohorts, um, and gave that advice.
They are some of the most vulnerable populations in this
country who are likely
to have the most long term poor outcomes.
Anything you would like to add that Joe?
I think only that, um, the, um,
cohorts we're investing went into four year arrangements,
um, with those organizations to support those changes.
Um, the ambition here is that the fund does grow over time
and that additional investment in further cohorts would be
dependent upon additional funding.
Ultimately, there's a hard edge to the fund. Um,
The Your, your investing in in social services,
you're looking for the return on those.
Um, and continued investment obviously depends upon you
having continued confidence in that return.
Just a couple of supplementary questions
and other people may have subs as well.
Um, but in terms of the outcomes, I'm looking also at your,
um, non-financial performance indicators in the budget.
Nothing in that financial indicated works about outcomes.
It talks about advice that you provide to the thing.
So for example, I've seen that, like for example, on page 19
of your report, you mentioned a lot
of initiatives that you have taken.
Tangible ones. How are you gonna measure the outcomes
and what happens when the money that you've allocated
for it ran out and you didn't
achieve the outcomes you wanted?
Ultimately, you need to use investment logic to test,
to see if we're delivering the outcomes
that we are expecting to see.
We have quite a robust process of the outcomes
and the interim indicators that we would expect to see,
to see if we're making progress.
If it's not working, we need to work with those providers
to see if there is a better way we can do
to deliver those outcomes.
We need regular measurement
and data to see if we are making the most effective, um,
or getting the most effective results.
Recognizing that these providers are working in some
of the most complex situations in the country, um,
these results won't come up in a linear progressive way.
They need to have the time
and the scope to work with those very vulnerable, um,
clients and communities.
Uh, so they, they've got the ability to do that,
but ultimately we do need to be keeping regular tracking
to see if we are making the progress
that we would hope to be doing.
When we go into a, uh, original contract with a provider,
we ask them for it to develop a theory of change that allows
that provider to demonstrate to us,
and we work alongside them of the, I expect results
that they would expect to see
with their particular supports that they can provide.
We can then go and measure that to see if that theory
of change is actually playing out in reality.
Um, that will deliver over time indications
that we are making success.
And if we're not seeing that success, then it's a, it's a
transparent conversation with that provider about
what we can do to, to change tech if we're not delivering
That. One final
supplemental question,
if we can just go into one example on page 19.
You mentioned early year support, autism New Zealand.
Um, this is hugely important. I agree.
Uh, what then would your outcomes be for that?
When do you expect to see some form of outcome?
And also more importantly, it talks about the needs
of autistic children and children selling signs of autism.
The barrier that we have now in terms
of autism is diagnosis.
Diagnosis is hugely expensive.
So is that gonna be also affected? That's addressed in here.
I'll ask Joe to address that question.
He's been leading this part bit
Of work. Yeah, and it's a great example
to, to walk through.
Thank you. Um, that particular initiative is using some, um,
very early screening tools, um,
and supporting frontline professionals who work, um, with,
with new parents and, and,
and very young children, um, to identify people
with potentially neurodivergent behaviors at an early age.
Um, they then wrap some extra support around those parents
and give them some, um, some, some effectively some tools
and techniques that they might wanna consider using
that reflect, um, the, the difference
and in also in terms of ECE teachers
and other people who are engaged
with those, with those children.
That theory of change that the organization has put forward,
um, looks at early identification.
It looks at, um, families
and educators better understanding the needs
of autistic children
and the strategies they can use to have a positive impact,
um, in terms of long-term outcomes, um, to decre
to decrease child expression of distress
and to reduce parental stress
and increase parental sense of competence and confidence.
Um, ultimately though, um,
and this is again a great example, the actual outcomes
that you see from that investment are 4, 5, 6 years, hence.
Mm-hmm. You know, you are looking at, um, young children,
um, who are in, um, the early stages of school
and are more confident and capable
and supported in being there than they would've been
otherwise if they hadn't had those supports, um, through
that, the early phase.
So we are looking, that's also an initiative
that is quite different and it's testing something new
and it's one of the, um, early tests, if you like, of, um,
initiatives that might make a wider change to public service
and social services across the country in time.
Um, if what they're doing works and has a significant impact
and we can clearly see the return on that, then
that's something that you wanna see adopted across the
Country. Your
question, Jen, thank you and thank you for that.
Um, I guess reading the annual report, one thing
that I felt was missing, which would be understandable in
the first year, is the, uh, stakeholder feedback coming
through, which I of course can't see any of that,
but there has been quite a lot of it outside
of your annual report and it's not all been positive.
Um, a UT's recent social transformation research,
there was a very strong panel who were very critical
of the social investment agency
and, um, your approach to social investment,
and particularly around the fact
that you talk about being disruptors,
and I don't disagree with that,
but disruption for them looked like six month contracts
because people weren't aware of what was going on
and the fact that they couldn't get staff
and small NGOs shutting down, what's the price
to our country if that happens?
And we don't have those people there in the interim
until this all takes off.
And what do you have to say to that?
Um, so some
of those smaller providers play a crucial role, um,
but we can only fund what we are being mandated to fund.
What we need to do is ensure that, uh,
in this particular sense that those providers have access
to the most appropriate data that they can see,
so they can make changes that they can, where they, um,
feel is appropriate today, really understand the needs
of the community with the data that government has.
We've, um, developed a regional data explor tool,
which allows those communities
to have far greater access to that data.
Um, also the arrangements
that we are putting in place take a longer term, uh,
look at their contracts so they've got more robustness
outside of the social investment agency.
I can't particularly comment, uh,
unless Joe, you've got some more to add there.
I think only to say That
The social investment fund is less than 1% government's
investment in, in social services.
It wasn't designed to take over or to, um, supplement
or in any kind of sequence for funding
that was reduced from other organizations
and as a, as a result of decisions taken by other agencies.
So I I wasn't quite clear on the
Question there. So, so I think
that's a really
good point that you are making.
And we've had this conversation
before when I had my briefing, which was great,
thank you for that.
But that's not what's coming through from other agencies.
And these NGOs are getting six month contracts, not able
to employ staff because the other
agencies are concerned about what's going to happen
with procurement because of the social investment agency.
They are saying that, uh, we are not sure
where this is going and the social investment.
So it is a responsibility of yours
and the interactions that you have with those agencies.
And we are seeing some of those NGOs collapsing.
To your point about, um, the re the data
at that same panel, one of the panelists said,
I've spent $30,000 on an impact lab report proving
that I am making, or my organization is making a difference,
but I still cannot get the funding long term now
because of this disruption that's happened to the sector
and no one's going beyond six months.
Again, we can't really speak for other agencies practice.
What we can do is ensure that we're working very closely
with those agencies so they understand
our practices and what we're up to.
The other pathway, which this may be, uh,
leading into is the contract consolidation
pathway, which is,
That was my next question,
so I'd love to hear more about that. Thank you.
Which is a pathway where NGOs can apply,
um, to, to, um, con consolidate
multiple government contracts
where it feels most appropriate.
They're working with a particular cohort from various
different funding agencies.
They can then apply to us
and work with us to see if there's mechanisms
where we can simplify their contracting
and put it onto an outcomes based contract, um,
and allow for them to work more closely in their communities
with those particular cohorts despite, uh, not having
to marry up various, um,
priorities from various different agencies.
We will do that for on those agencies behalf, um,
but it simplifies their reporting
and allows them to have far more flexibility over
that contract so they can,
they can respond to the needs as they serve.
Again. Joe, is there
anything you want to add in that particular
space? He's leading this bit of work?
I think, um, I, we can come back
to the contract consolidation tool.
I just think it's really important
to say we've been crystal clear, um,
with agencies about our plans for the next year or two
and what those investments mean.
Ministers have set us very clear priorities
and cohorts that we're investing in.
We've also spoken to hundreds of, um, staff and,
and leaders from the social sector across NGOs.
And again, been really clear
about what we're setting out to do.
I think I would acknowledge that
for many smaller organizations
that don't see themselves in social investment fund at the
moment in terms of the new investment pathway,
but we are seeing, um, some really strong applications come
through contract consolidation,
and also in the most recent round of funding we've seen it,
um, one collective of smaller organizations that's come
through successfully set.
Um, yeah. And um, I think that's, that's,
that's really encouraging that organizations recognizing
that it's difficult to have the backbone around data
and insights that you might need, um, to be, um, in
that social investment space.
Um, but if you club together and think about it collectively
and we support, then there's opportunities there.
So, um, just a sub to that, um, Alistair, I wanted
to ask about, um, how you have found work
with other agencies, um,
and how that has tied into, uh, your work
and is there good cooperation?
Is there an understanding of what you're doing, um,
and are they eager and is there help?
Um, along the way?
I would say as a, as a general, um, theme
that those agencies are very, very supportive
and want to lean right into support where we,
where they can, where it's appropriate.
There's obviously some boundaries that we need to take
where, um, where agencies have statutory responsibilities
to deliver a particular service.
Ran is a plastic example.
Um, but most of those other ones, we need to be very clear
that we are not, um, that they're able
to perform those particular functions.
So those contracts may be,
depending on the exact situations, more appropriate
to sit back with those host agencies.
That will depend very much on the circumstances that it is.
Um, the other thing is, the other aspect is, say,
clinical services that probably is far more appropriate
to sit with with the, uh, health New Zealand.
Uh, rather than us, we're still working through a number
of these particular issues
and it really does have to be done on a case by case basis,
but the cooperation from the agencies has been, um,
uh, really outstanding.
Just a, um,
and just to follow through, follow up, um, do you,
do you have an alignment of cohorts
because, um, we've mentioned, uh, uh,
identifying cohorts where the focus needs to be on,
and do you find that the other agencies have an alignment
of, of cohorts with yourselves?
Mm-hmm.
Generally, um, there is an alignment of cohorts.
You've gotta remember these agencies.
They have vertical accountabilities where they've got
to look after a particular system.
Yes, we are focused more on that, um, horizontal,
where we need to look at those cohorts along multiple
different ways, looking at their developments over a
particular life course or, um, how they react
as human beings.
So there's different, there's just different ways
of looking at this particular view.
Um, our cohorts
that we've selected have come from various different
mechanisms, but generally we have had expertise in the data
from many, many years.
And what we've identified is some particular cohorts
that keep on appearing as more likely
to have very, very poor outcomes.
Mm-hmm. There's many different ways you can cut the data
and many different ways you can do that,
but this is the first attempt
to have a go at looking at this cohort based approach
and really taking a different look at it, working closely
with the verticals, the vertical agencies along,
but taking a more, uh, appropriate sense where we can look,
allow those providers to look right across their agencies.
Efer, is there anything you want to
mention in the cohort space?
Uh, I think that's right. The cohorts enable us
to take a cross cutting view of, um, a small population
and their service interactions
and life experiences over time,
and then through the fund to identify, um, how
to invest earlier, uh,
to get better outcomes for those cohorts.
And then put in place the, uh, continuous feedback loops
that enable us to see whether we are achieving
what we expected to achieve through those investments with,
um, interactions with other agents, with agencies,
we are able to see in the data whether, um,
and how cohorts are already, um,
interacting with those services.
Um, and the, the two have, so the fund
and then looking back at agencies will enable us to say, w
where could agencies also start to improve over time
to get the best outcome from the relatively modest
investment through the fund.
Thank you. New question, Maureen.
Uh, thank you. Some of it's actually been covered in,
in some of the, um, presentation already,
so thank you very much for that.
Um, I note, I note that, um, with the three demonstration
and already underway that it's, um,
it's been the opportunity now to bring together, um, some
of these programs that would
otherwise not have had the funding allocated.
And it was a, it was common feedback from NGOs
that the silo based contracting,
which had clear KPIs were not always appropriate in every
community given what's available.
Um, so in terms of, um, us as a committee,
uh, reviewing performance of this new way of doing things,
given that it's very long term
and the, um, we, we review on an annual basis
at, at what point are you going
to know whether success is in the in site
or whether it's time to just,
Again, slightly beyond different?
Um, it will depend slightly on each individual program,
but overall we need to, the starters, I think, um,
the social investment fund has been a missing part
of the system architecture for a while, which has been able
to take a longer term, but also portfolio neutral view.
But some of these particular, um, cohorts, so this is some,
so it is, as you say,
something new which we need to start from scratch.
We progressively over time need
to start reporting on the portfolio
of investments that we have.
We've, we've got three
and we've announced another seven
that we are starting to work with.
As that gets bigger, this committee will have a strong
interest in the, in the overall performance of the fund.
There'll be some, some particular investments that, uh,
are higher risk and may or may not pay off.
There's be some that are more conservative
and we've got far more likely to do that.
We'll need to work out our reporting mechanisms
to provide a lot of transparency to the committee
to show exactly how that's going to work.
Um, 'cause I completely agree, there's, there needs
to be a depth of understanding from this committee
so you can understand exactly what our progress is
while also recognizing that earlier statement that I said
that some of these things won't take a,
necessarily a linear approach to see
how the progress is when you're working at that very, um,
vulnerable end of that community.
Some we may know success in different ways depending on the
individual or the whanau in and in concern.
Um, for example, we can't predict in three
or four years time how strong engagement
with the NGO will come out necessarily.
We'll have a good idea based on our theory of change,
but it may appear in more regular school attendance.
It may appear in enrollment
with the gp, we're not quite sure.
Again, those are gonna be individual circumstances, which
we need to work out.
Uh, we, we are working out a way
to report this transparently.
So there's, um, allow people like yourselves
to take good scrutiny of the work we're doing, um,
and also allow us to, um, for our own internal measurement
to see if what we're doing is working and if not adjusted.
'cause fundamentally, these, uh,
communities need the support that we are providing
and they need us get it right.
Can I supplement that chair if you don't mind? Just general?
'cause it comes back to a question that I,
I'm not sure we quite responded to earlier.
And we're currently reviewing,
we've got an outcomes framework
for the investments since we're investing
against those outcomes framework.
And the measures we're using for that will, um,
through our strategy, be part
of our annual measures, um, next year.
And they're in development, which is a question earlier,
just in, in terms of the, um, early signs of success.
I think you can think of that in, in four stages.
The first is actually making an astute
investment in the first place.
So is the clear theory of change, is it credible?
Is there evidence behind it?
Do the community support that organization?
Does that organization have the relationships
and connections to the public and other social services
locally that it's gonna need to be successful?
So that initial assessment and based on the, on the cohort
and the potential changes that that cohort could achieve
with the right support, all of those things come together
to, to make a decision.
And ultimately what I'll be held to account for
as running the fund is that that fund is generating a return
that we can clearly see in evidence.
And as we enter the middle stages of that investment, some
of those early and intermediate
outcomes start to come through.
Um, and that starts to give us confidence as to whether
that theory is turning out in practice.
And again, that enables us to report quarterly
to our social investment fund ministers group.
And obviously that will enable us to provide richer material
to this, to this committee on an annual basis.
Ultimately, the evaluation plan matures on that investment
and we get a robust look back at the activities,
what's contributed most to the outcomes that we've seen,
what can we learn from that evaluation
and how do we play that learning back into our new
investments rolling forward.
So we're trying to get that fund cycle running
and based on evidence
and learning so that we can make smarter
and smart investments over time
and help the social sector be as successful as it can be.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Uh, and it's great to have that on record too, um,
you know, for the committee in the future so that, um, yeah,
we're all aware of, you know,
the challenges and opportunities.
Um, one of the things that you've obviously, um, basing, uh,
the measurement on is data.
And we've had a, we've had a, um,
a presentation about the IDI and,
but one of the gaps they, uh, referred to was around health
and, um, mentioned, um, you know,
being enrolled in a GP or whatever.
But, um, at the same time, um, if all
of those systems don't talk to each other, uh,
then it is difficult to accumulate that data.
Is there anything, um, that you've done
to maybe help initiate some change in that?
I'll let it get into this in a second.
But basically, um, there's two aspects to that.
The IDI and more,
more data getting into the IDI is incredibly important.
Yep. And part of our role as a central agency is start
to put pressure on the system for that to happen.
Mm-hmm. Um, the second part is data by itself,
um, needs to be interpreted
and put into context sometimes with
that community understanding of what's going on in
that particular region and those, um, in those particular,
uh, but data can be misconstrued if, if not da,
not used thoughtfully.
And we need to be very careful that that can be this,
um, that it's done properly.
However, the IDI is a is an incredible asset to New Zealand
and we can do credible amounts with that.
Uh, it is very important if it can probably give you a quick
update of the progress that's been made.
'cause considerable amounts of progress has been made over
the last year and a lot
and a lot, there's a lot of
momentum happening in this space.
Yeah. Um, we've worked very closely
with Stats New Zealand over the past year
and actually building on our longstanding
relationship with stats.
Uh, so, uh, the, I understand the last data load
for the IDI was the biggest ever.
Um, and that's probably largely due to a lot of the work
that we've done across agencies
and to identify missing data sets, uh, that would be helpful
for us and, uh, and, uh, for providers
and understanding their impact.
So there are 13 new data sets that have gone into the IDI,
um, and 18 have been updated,
and the frequency of updates, um, will be,
um, improved as well.
So that, um, you know, it's, as Alistair said,
it's not just getting data into the IDI,
but it's also giving that data back.
Um, the second part of
what we have done over the last year is to, uh, work
with providers
and with stats to streamline the process
for providers themselves to get their data into the IDI.
Um, we created, you know, a standardized manual for that,
um, and made it easy.
And we have a standard operating practice
now with stats as well.
Um, and we are now being able to give back that data to
providers and to communities in a way, um, as Alistair said,
that's, uh, really understandable,
and which verified some of their instincts about
what they already knew with their services.
Um, and we're able to provide that back to them
and say, here's who you're reaching.
Here's the impact you're having, here's the other services
that the people that you're reaching are interacting with.
Um, and, uh, that will, that will enable them
to improve the quality of their services. Thank
You. I have a question too,
if you might bring
it here as a supplementary.
Mm-hmm. Um, so in the last couple of years
as sort chairing this committee, I've been really interested
all hearing all these agencies and,
and entities that work in the social sphere.
Um, and a lot of talk about we need to focus on
outcomes versus outputs do things, a general agreement.
That's what needs to happen.
What's really difficult,
and what I haven't yet heard a clear articulation of is how
to actually identify what outcomes are with the complexity
of the, you know, um, environments and people
and personalities that that's, uh, you know,
that agencies are dealing with.
And how to the format, what an outcome is
and over a sort of a, a particular period of time as well.
So I'm, I'm interested in what you are doing.
If you sort of articulated a bit, Joe, you know,
there's a bit of the framework, there's theory of change
and how you're gonna map against that over time.
I'm sort of, how, how are you going look,
gonna look at this differently and how are you going
to use data and how are you gonna encourage other entities
to collate data to then dashboard
for decision makers go Okay,
are actually achieving outcomes.
Uh,
It's a couple of things.
Um, but I'll allow after to speak to this.
'cause we've done a lot of work in this space,
and I think we also need to remember
that perfect is the enemy of God in,
in this particular place,
because we're working our way through this, we need
to do this progressively and we'll learn as we go ahead.
Mm-hmm. Um, but we have, uh, using,
we've, we've developed a methodology, um,
which has allowed us to steer some of our,
where we put a figure on some of our investments
and what we'd expect to achieve.
And it, um, the, this allows us to, uh,
basically it's a cost benefit analysis,
but we do that prior to the effect.
And we put do this into the IDI using, uh,
two different cohorts of, um, uh,
pop two population cohorts in the IDI one is the one
that we expect to see.
And one is a very, like for like the IDI, this is one
of the beauties of the IDI, it's,
it's such a large database we can find, uh,
a relatively similar population in that database.
Doesn't have to be, um, absolutely perfect,
but allows us to measure
what the results that we are getting.
And if we're starting to achieve some
of those outcomes that we talked about.
Um, the outcomes vary, as you say, whanau
to wau family to family, um,
in particular places.
But fundamentally, we are looking for greater tho those
whanau to have greater agency
over their own decision making.
Um, and we also see a lot of the government targets
and things like that measured in outcomes.
We will look, you know, we, we'll see greater, um,
more children turning up to skill through these initiatives.
We'll see greater, um, GP enrollment, which will lead to,
uh, reductions in emergency
department, those sorts of things.
But fra do you want to go into more depth about
Yeah. Uh, I think
the point Alistair made about perfection not
being the enemy of the good, um, is, is useful here.
Um, what we're trying is to
simplify the measurement of social services.
Um, and we've started by, uh, setting out, um,
and social investment fund ministers have agreed the high
level outcome areas for the fund.
Um, those are, for example, uh, improved health,
greater safety, ensuring stable and secure housing, um,
and improved not improving knowledge
and skills, growing income and wealth
and supporting people into work.
Those are our high level outcome statements for the fund
that shouldn't ta shouldn't change, um, very rapidly,
um, or very frequently.
Uh, and then, uh, we would propose
to measure those through a very small number of indicators
that tell us something about progress.
So for, uh, reduced serious health events,
you would look at, um, acute hospitalizations, uh,
in the last 12 months, um, for, um,
um, say for safety.
You'd want to know about count of, uh, violent offense, um,
offenses and police proceedings.
Uh, those tell us about the trajectories of the cohorts.
Um, but, but most importantly, uh, what providers
and families themselves count as progress will be able
to be connected in the IDI with these measures.
And over time we will understand the connection
between those qualitative measurements through
to those big outcome statements.
So we've got a, a long-term, um,
long-term investment portfolio,
and we can start to connect the data, say, um, what,
what is it that we are wanting to achieve?
What is it that providers are seeing in their own data?
And then how does that link towards those, uh,
slightly bigger population measures of success. Mm-hmm.
That's the big challenge, isn't it?
It's actually identifying what a measure
of success looks in terms of an outcome.
I think, you know, hear I'm saying in terms of, um, what,
you know, hanau see ASCE success as well,
that's important as well.
It's also identifying what there is
and how to measure against that, um,
could be a bit of a challenge as well.
This will always be a ative process
as we get more data into the IDI,
but also as we learn more about what these, um,
successes look like, we want to, a large part
of social investment is taking learning loops.
So working with those providers who are working
with those whanau to understand
what actually really worked on the ground.
We can have all the theory we like in Wellington,
but if it doesn't work on the ground with those providers,
um, and if it's not measurable, we can't, we need to be able
to change t and have confidence if we are getting, if
we need to be able to provide confidence to ministers
that we are delivering what we expect to do.
And if not, we need to be able to flag that
with ministers early enough that there's a chance
to change tech that needs to be robust and transparent.
Just in terms of the data collection, that sort
of incorporated part of my long question,
but, um, how, how, how
or what, what work we be doing with, say, whanau with
agencies, with entities that you're working with to collect
that data that's actually going to help form, you know,
progress or, or otherwise. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Okay.
So at the beginning of an investment,
we agree in evaluation plan, we agree a set of outcomes, um,
and obviously we sign off on a
theory of change that's credible.
Um, the organization involved will collect some information
themselves as you fully expect them to
as learning organizations
with a focus on achieving changing communities.
Um, the only thing that they share into the IDI, um,
when they work with on new investments is a start date
and end date and then identifier for the individual.
There's nothing else there.
And what that allows us to do is play who that cohort is
and what we know about that cohort back to
that organization, not in a disclosive way,
but basically, here's the thousand people
that you supporting last year,
or here's the 500 people that you're supporting.
Now's what we know about that cohort. Over time.
The IDI collects events,
they're quite deficit focused events.
They are, um, hospital admissions.
They are, um, benefit amounts and claims
and so on, um, in quite a lot of detail.
What that means for us is that over time we can see how
that cohort, um, interacts with public services
and we can see the direct
and some of the estimated fiscal costs of,
of those engagements.
Now obviously the organization on the ground is focused on
helping people and families achieve their goals.
Um, but the hypothesis here, which we share
with those organizations, that if they achieve those goals
and they achieve those outcomes,
that does mean more people in work.
It does mean safer households,
it does mean less hospital admissions.
It does mean less negative outcomes.
And effectively that's what we're tracking together.
In my view, the, the challenge is not actually measuring the
outcomes as defined in the other outcomes framework.
It's the attribution. Mm-hmm.
It's understanding whether those outcomes have changed
or are shifting as a result of,
of that services intervention.
And that's where the method gets, gets tricky.
Um, you, you sometimes you can see it very, very clearly.
Sometimes there's a bit more of a, of a, um, nuance to that.
And ultimately as we get into years three
and four, our practice needs to be mature enough
to understand that and
to be really confident about attribution
and to make sure that the methodologies we're using reflect
that and we can continue to make smarter investments. Thank
You Sory, Laura.
Um, thanks Mr. Sharon.
Apologies, my voice is a bit this morning.
Um, my question's kind
of following off from Joseph, if I can get it out.
Um, do you think then the data, the IDI data is correct,
or do you think we need to have some other measures in there
in order to be able to, like,
is the data we are collecting enough?
Is it, is it the right data for starters?
And if I look at like previous contracts
where they're very output based.
Mm. I mean, some of this data is
output at the IDI, which is fine.
Um, but I think is a starting point like, ah, the,
is the information we're
collecting actually the right information?
Do we need to add some things to that?
Um, and secondly, I know that organizations in the past,
like when they've been collecting their, their output data,
they're always concerned at the time.
It takes the amount of staff and resourcing that takes.
Mm-hmm. Um, so I'm really keen
and interested to know what in these new
contracts, um, you're saying that they're moving towards,
yes, there'll be some requirements
to report more on the outcomes,
but there won't be the outputs.
Um, have you done a bit of discussion
or research around like how,
how much effort that is taking mm-hmm.
Um, from some of these organizations
and whether it's Yeah. Valuable, I guess. Yeah,
I'll let Joe speak, but we've done a lot
Of thought into this space is basically
is an opening statement.
Um, there's always, we could always have more data.
A lot of it is how it's interpreted
and how, um, it is analyzed so you can make,
and you're very transparent about the assumptions
that you're making when you're doing that, that
and then also being quite collaborative with those providers
to understand the interpretation of it.
But Joe, you've got a lot of thinking in this case.
I mean, firstly, this is a great opportunity to,
to make a really important point,
is we've turned that model on its head.
So we are not sat in wellton rooms on whiteboards designing
service specifications and contracts.
We're asking organizations to tell us
how they would deliver change in their communities
and the outcomes that are, are of interest to them and us.
What that means is they design the service,
they identify the measures that they want to use
to measure progress, um,
and they track that progress in those intermediate measures
and share that progress with us, um, so
that we can understand how things are moving.
So ultimately it moves the focus onto agreeing upfront on
that theory of change and then wrapping an outcome agreement
around that theory of change
and managing it as, as an agreement moving forward.
So the information that organizations are collecting is the
information that they want to collect, they need to collect
to understand progress.
Now the, to answer the first part of the question, um,
again, really important.
Um, ultimately as we do the evaluation, we get
to see whether those outcomes changing, um, are changing
as we expected given the intermediate outcomes.
And maybe we start to see
that those intermediate outcomes don't necessarily predict
The Outcomes as we thought they would.
And we might identify some other things that are,
and that's where the learning comes in, is saying,
we're seeing these things move,
but maybe we're not seeing the changes
in two or three years time.
Why not? What can we learn from that
and how do we do a little bit of redesign with you
and to make sure that that and practice is sound
and the measures are, are sound.
So I think that kind of that old contracting
for outputs model where you specify a document,
hand it over and says, deliver this.
Go around, see someone twice every week
and three times on a Thursday, sure.
Um, is flipped on its head saying, what do you need to do,
achieve outcomes, and how can we use government data
to help you, um, learn from and, and push forward on that
and, and be successful ultimately.
Any question, Jamie?
Um, if I go on to the street today
and talk to some constituents
and say, social investment agencies come in, um,
you've given a lot of terminology
and I'm just trying to get to the basics of it.
Um, who, who are the vulnerable people
and who are the vulnerable communities?
And from, obviously there's some obvious ones,
but from what you've done so far, who are some of the ones
that aren't as obvious when
you actually go through your data,
When you go through the data?
Again, this, both us guys probably got a point
of view to add to Adam for this.
I would say there's,
there's certain communities that are struggling
and we know that, as you just alluded to, there are a number
of, uh, populations that are potentially a bit more hidden,
uh, from that they, they, they will, uh, not appear
so overtly on the streets and things like that,
but they most likely have some mental health
or neurodiversity, um, issues
that can be really worked with, especially upfront
before they manifest themselves into a crisis.
Again, this is the whole part of the, um, there's also,
um, some communities that
just taken it in a
dealt dell when they're interacted
with in a more compassionate way, uh,
will benefit from just being treated
with some sort of respect.
And, um, doing that, the, the population that we really need
to think hard about where the, the science will lead you to,
uh, is in that first 2000 days that pop those populations,
younger kids, uh,
who may have everything stacked
against them from when they're born.
But at the moment, um, the system will try
and deal with that as well as it can
through the universal services,
but it'll only really, they'll only reach the threshold
for greater support when something really flares up in
their particular situation.
Um, that may be,
and that's one of the reasons why we're taught our cohorts
are of particular interests.
Kids have stood, been stood down before the age of 12.
That's already, there's a big, uh, sign
of poor, poor outcomes.
Um, children of people who have, uh, parents who are
incarcerated or recently incarcerated.
Again, these are the populations that may not appear
every day around the place that, um, are going
to sort of the not sort of necessary on the street making
that, um, uh, cries for help in a way.
But they are populations that we know with all the data
that are likely to have much poorer outcomes.
Um, there, there will be differences again,
how these things manifest themselves,
but they all end up being poor outcomes.
Um, sometimes males may more act out more aggressively.
Females may, um, tend to
get other poor outcomes like earlier pregnancies
or things like that, which may not come across, um,
as obviously to
through one-on-one calls and things like that.
Okay. Can I just, uh, quick supplementary, do,
do people actually know they're a vulnerable person
or they're in a vulnerable community,
or is it actually the data that told you that,
or it that obvious that most people would realize?
I think we need to be very careful in this space
because there's some people that, um,
they may have everything set,
but they've got, they're so incredibly resilient
that they will, um, that we shouldn't be putting a label on
people just because they, uh,
come up within a particular number.
We, a lot of social investment is ensuring
that the resources are put in the most appropriate places,
so then those people on the ground
can make those judgements.
Other people we've face to face, I shouldn't be making any
of those decisions about who's vulnerable, who's not.
I can steer the data to allow those providers
to make those decisions on, on that part.
Um, there's some incredible stories
of resilience despite all the circumstances.
So, um, we need to be very,
very careful about putting labels on particular people.
However, we do know through many, many years of data
that there are populations that are higher risk than others,
and that's how we should allocate resources.
Anything you do,
It was very Carefully articulated was indeed.
Um, uh, new question. It's not actually, it sort
of turns into a suck from here.
I've changed questions, um, several times.
Um, you, it's really interesting what you're saying
and I appreciate that people are trying
to do incredibly good work
and I have looked at those issues with the young women
who have got parents who have been imprisoned
and how important the work is in that area.
But I also have the family and sexual violence portfolio,
and I've become increasingly aware
that there are older women who are becoming a homeless
and they aren't as popular a course.
They're not as cute. Um, they haven't got
as long a life into the community.
What happens to people like that
where they're a small cohort,
but they're absolutely, I,
I'm worried they're gonna get overlooked.
Um, when we choose these priorities,
and often we put it down to mental health,
we put it actually it's about affordability
of housing and vulnerability.
So how, what happens with those groups in your systems
where they're just not as appealing a group?
I think there's a couple of roles
for the agency in this particular sense.
Social Investment fund is governed by a group of ministers
and they have their cohorts quite clearly defined.
And that's based on our advice.
The other part to, uh,
social investment agency is the central agency role
where we have a role to start to shine a light on areas of,
um, are the greater need cohorts of concern that
those sorts of aspects, so ministers have
the full advice able to them.
This will be a progressive thing
as we build up our resources over time.
Yep. It will depend slightly on, um,
our, where our data does take us, we need to be quite, um,
careful as we go through this that we're not reacting
to the issues of the day,
but looking at where the data will start to show
and point those things out.
Um, but progressively that's one of the, that's one
of the rationales for the central agency function
that we have the ability to look right across the system
and start to see where
greater either need is
or where greater opportunities are
for better support. Okay.
To allow flat, but can I just drill down on that one?
Sure. Let's just look at that example. Yep.
Those women don't go into our refuges
because women with children get priority.
They are a small cohort.
They are not politically appealing in the same way.
What do you do as an agency
and how do you set up in your first year?
And I appreciate it's overwhelming to make sure
that you are leading in this space of
otherwise forgotten cohorts.
I think we need to be very thoughtful
that we're following data
and, uh, where the science will also point
to you with these things.
Um, again, these are very tricky.
There's gonna be numerous examples. Yeah,
It's really hard. I'm sorry.
Um, and it will be a progressive thing over time.
Um, where we need to, again, we just need to look into the,
into the IDI and identify those particular populations.
Looking at the outcomes over time,
how we measure them also matters.
What data goes into it.
All these things all add up cumulatively to greater advice.
So the decision makers have all
the advice put in front of them.
This is not a quick thing that will happen overnight,
but, uh, progressively that's part of our role.
We need to be doing that. You
Need to lead in that space.
We need, we've got a role to start to lead
and lead the social investment system.
That sometimes will mean shining a light.
That will sometimes mean doing some of the stuff
through the social investment fund.
That will also mean building the tools
and architecture so other agencies can do it.
Um, again, on the particular population that may those,
that particular example you said may be better housed, um,
responded to by a different government agency.
But if we are working with them
and understanding, looking at a population lens rather than
the vertical lens, we can start to put
pressure on the system and give more evidence-based advice
so people can make those
decisions. Thank you. Supplementary,
Thank you.
Apologies for lateness.
Um, just to the IDI, if I can just swing to
that a little bit and, um, so
generally Maori communities have a, a reasonable, uh,
mistrust I guess in, in the space and data
and the sovereignty of data.
Mm-hmm. And so our question, my question,
my first question is around the, the, the IDI modeling
and the bias that is bound to exist.
How do you look
after that so that, um, Maori data is, you know,
understood carefully enough to get a good model
that satisfies the groups
or the, the space that you are dealing with?
And I appreciate so it, and it's, it's good to,
and I think it might even come back
to M'S question about the whole integrated contracts back in
the days siloed stuff.
'cause I was obviously,
and I remember you of course in the bans team times
and sitting and having our little sticky notes
and thinking, um, what makes an outcome?
And some funny person said,
I think it's when you add all the outcomes,
all the outputs together, um, they call outcome boss,
whether that's, that was me by the way, but, but that,
but we were trying to be like, how do you do this?
And here we are again in 2025, trying to figure that out.
And when we talk about this as a progressive thing,
and it's an iterative,
and all the time, children remain vulnerable
and become more so, and their families remain vulnerable
and become also mm-hmm.
So, um, yeah. Sorry. That's
Quite, it's one of those, it's, it's a dilemma.
Yes. How fast do you go?
Um, there's plenty of things to work with.
I think on the data sense,
and especially in the Maori data space.
Um, African, go into this more in a sec.
We need to be really, uh, cognizant
and respectful about the use of the data.
We need to, as an agency, we need
to be very transparent about how we're doing things
so people have a chance to really understand this.
Um, we need to res remember that this is not my data.
It's not the, it's, uh, it's individual's data.
It's people's data. It's about then we, we need to be very
thoughtful about how we go about using that.
Um, and from a social investment perspective, we need to,
um, ensure
that we maintain the social license to use people's data.
That a lot of that means, uh, giving that data back
and extracting it.
Um, the IDI, um, for all its benefits, we,
we've employed a team of people with PhDs and statistics.
It's hard to access and hard to interpret. Mm-hmm.
So we've got, part of our role is to extract that data,
put it into a format that can be understood transparently,
um, and give that back to various communities, uh,
however they describe themselves.
We've been working closely with some iwi in this particular
space, and therefore you may want to jump into this.
Yeah.
Um, uh, I think the, uh, the, the key
for us in, in using the IDI is is that transparency.
Um, but also in the interpretation of the data.
It's not our interpretation.
And when we work with our iwi partners, uh,
we're often working quite hard to really understand
what questions they're seeking to answer.
Um, and then, uh, testing constantly is,
is this what you're interested in?
Is this how you think about it?
Well, we could, we could do this in a different way, um,
to show you what's available.
Um, so it's, it's a real
Iterative process when working with our iwi partners.
Thank you. Um, just so you just said
before, um, the need to,
and I agree, I think it's good, does need to equal
actually will, you know, we, you, you, um, response we need
to respect and we need to do those things.
Uh, does that, will that actualize
and be Yes, we do have that capacity even in the PhDs.
Do you have that capability to the PhD level
in both these sort of worldviews?
Um, that's, yeah. I'd be interested.
One of our core values as an agency
has been transparent by nature.
Um, we, I'm very cognizant of the learnings
that happened back in about 2016 when, um, data was
one government agency insisted on
data being coming into them.
We, and there was quite rightly some resistance to that.
There's also been a strong view in the
Maori data sovereignty space.
This is a complex, complicated world, um,
where we need to have respectful conversations.
So yes, we cannot do our job, um, using this data
and giving the best advice to ministers without, um,
the confidence of the wider community that we're doing
that in a particular way.
So it's a core part of our business, fundamentally.
What is what you're asking? Thank you.
We will stumble into some mistakes,
but we will apologize for that
and we'll put our hand up when we do that incorrectly.
Um, and people will always have their own interpretations
depending on their particular context.
Mm-hmm. So we need to be incredibly thoughtful, um,
and recognizing that this data's it's about people,
um, I think needs to be very clear
that no one in this agency sees the name
of any particular person for a start.
We only see it at an aggregated level.
Um, we, this is not about sharing little Jimmy's story
and things like that, that is for the people on the ground,
the frontline people who, who need to know that information.
It's also a need to know part of this, how we interpret that
and give that back is very, very important.
And we will continue to work with those communities
as transparently as we can. Uh, your question, Laura.
Cool. Thank you. Um, I just have to relay the questions.
Um, the first one, so you mentioned
before in terms of consolidation,
and this is something that, um, the on entity has sort
of mentioned as a potential concern as well in terms of
that smaller NGOs, the kind of data that now they have
to collect is hugely expensive.
Mm-hmm. So naturally they price themselves out
for a, all of these sort things.
How long do you prevent Solidation
and ensure it doesn't equal them to monopolization
and then a one size fits all model
where smaller NGOs simply do not have the ability
to actually do the work or get funded?
Um, I'll let, Joe's done a lot
of thinking in this particular space,
and he's got a lot of expertise.
There is a, I recognize there is a, um,
some high overhead our methodology.
We actually asked for less data than is currently provided.
Uh, and we will, um, when those contracts are consolidated,
which should be a lower overhead, uh, over time, um,
there is opportunities also for NGOs to think about
how they can sort of also team up together, um,
and work together more at a sort of back office level
so they can do that more efficiently.
But Joe, you've been doing a lot of thinking in this space.
Mm-hmm. And firstly, just to be just a point of clarity,
the contract consolidation pathway is not constrained
by a cohort specific cohorts.
Any organization that is meeting the needs of
a similar group of people
with multiple contracts from government can make an
application for consolidation.
I just wanna make that, um, clear up front.
Um, and actually about half of the ones
that we are recommending are in the family harm space
because organizations do have quite a lot of funders in
that space and they want to tidy
up some of that arrangement.
In terms of consolidation, I think it's important to,
again, to turn this on its head.
Those organizations
that are in communities delivering social services,
particularly, um, for families facing multiple challenges.
They know that they need the systems and data
and infrastructure to be able to track what's going on.
They need to be locked their concerns, they need
to see progress, they need to learn from what they do
and feed that into their daily practice.
Many of those small organizations haven't had, um, frankly,
the resources to be able to put some of those systems
and infrastructure in place.
What we're doing with social investment is, um,
setting a bit of a stall out in terms of government, um,
and the social sector wanting to be better informed by data,
wanting to better learn from that information so
that ultimately people can improve their practice on the
ground and make more of a difference, um,
and help more people achieve their,
their goals and positive outcomes.
What we're seeing as a result of the work we're doing on,
um, the new investments in particular, um,
but on the other pathways I'm sure that will come
through too, is organizations coming together to recognizing
that three or four FTE in a,
in a small NGO are not gonna have the, the,
the resources they need to be able
to put those systems in in place.
Um, and unsurprisingly, two of our 10 investments
therefore are in collectives where people have come together
and are looking at shared data infrastructure
that supports multiple organizations.
I think that's not to say that small NGOs delivering a small
community service need lots of tech and data
and systems, they don't.
But if you are working in spaces where you do have
to record risk, where you do have to understand progress
and you do have to, um, build
that learning back into your practice, it's very difficult
to do that with bits of paper.
Um, and what's in people's heads.
One final question, uh, on the duration contract
that I think, um, that onward has
also addressed as a concern.
Um, let's say early years support,
you are funding 50 per year.
Are those, and you mentioned
before that you don't, won't see outcomes
for five to six years.
Are those 50 per year being funded
for five years at a minimum?
Are the contracts for five years?
So the contracts are for four years, um, and but
Four years is 50 per year.
I'm asking whether those 50 per year will be continued,
be supported for five years.
Yes. So, and it actually gives me a chance to,
to make a point more clearly than earlier.
Um, because when you talk about, um, people
and their varying levels of need
and challenges, um,
organizations ultimately make a call call on what's the
proportionate response they might find
that they can give a family and a
and a, in that case, um, the skills capabilities
that they need to, to support their young person into their,
into school age, um, in a short amount of time.
They might stay alongside that family
for a long, for a long time.
Um, and that ability to be able to flex
to the individual needs of children
and families is critical.
Um, 'cause a lot of our service specifications set times,
you do all this within 12 weeks,
you do this within six months.
Um, and that could be too much
for some people in too intrusive
and could be too little for others.
And so that ability to flex is absolutely
Critical. What is that as a supplement
integration?
Um, because one of the, one of the concern
that's been expressed to me multiple times is, um,
multiple truck rolls going up, people's driveways, uh,
all the different agencies have got a specific, you know,
responsibilities and specific appropriations.
Um, but that is exhausting for vulnerable families.
Um, so at what,
is there an opportunity in the work you are doing
to reduce those truck rolls
Ultimately? I think, again,
it's a little bit
of flipping on its head at the moment.
It's every government and agency going in
and working with that fund.
We need to flip it on its head of what does the ANA need
and then work backwards from that particular sense of
who is the most appropriate provider to be working with them
and who is supposed to be funding that.
It's a, we need to be, there is a line there though,
if there's like a alluded to
before, if there's statutory responsibility,
some agencies just do need to be there.
Um, but they can, there's ability to simplify that
and again, put it into the whanau perspective of
what is the support that they particularly need.
Um, and depending on the individual circumstances,
there is a place for us to do that.
Um, however, social investment a lot is, is a lot
of social investment is about prevention.
So, um,
those five cars up the driveway type thing happen usually at
a crisis and we should be there before that.
Um, hopefully stopping those drive cars.
Turning up to the driveway.
Last question, Jen. Well, it kind
of follows on from that.
Um, because this approach has been used successfully
in the past and, and from my perspective, one
of the most successful was called Taro, which some
of you know really well.
Um, and it was again, consolidation
of the different agencies having those discussions,
who was the most appropriate going in.
So it was a real place-based solution.
Can you give assurances that the seven initiatives
that have been announced are place-based to stop that sort
of thing happening as opposed to being program-based
as they've been, um, reported in the media being program.
Uh, that gave me a little bit of, oh my goodness,
are we going back in time
Here? Yep. Could
you judge, please?
Yeah. Um, absolutely.
Um, that initial test of whether that investment is credible
and worth, um, making, we look very strongly
at local relationships.
Um, and we actually published a short list
of the initiatives that we consider funding online
and in asked and asked for feedback.
And we will continue to do that
because of that commitment to transparency.
So by way of example, um, we wanted to know, um,
that if one organization was gonna set up in Hamilton
delivering a service that was particularly
around young people that were getting involved
with the police, um,
that the police were absolutely on board
and we actually facilitated conversations
and tested that to make sure
that those connections were in place.
Um, and that service, um, opened last week.
Um, we are also, um, particularly look to organizations
that are deeply embedded
and have that connection between the operational
and strategic end, which I you remember well.
Um, that ability to understand sit at a table every day
looking at family harm incidents
or, um, children that had reports of concern, understanding
that at that very granular level
and then being able to shape social services
around that intel.
So naty hour social health services in Whakatane
and we've invested in it very much in that space
and are bringing those two operational and um,
and commissioning of services together,
Which is great to hear.
I just think we need to get the language right
Around that because it
Is quite wrong at the moment how it's being reported.
Yeah. Well, well thank, thank you very much Sha
for caring for the clinic today.
You're obviously are keen interest in what you're doing.
Um, we wish you all the success going forward.
Thank you Pat. An important piece of work. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Cool.